Add release notes for v25.1.0-alpha.3 (#19301)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v25.1/v25.1.0-alpha.3.md

## v25.1.0-alpha.3

Release Date: January 15, 2025

{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-backward-incompatible-changes">Backward-incompatible changes</h3>

- Several metrics are redundant and have been removed. The following list maps each removed metric to an existing, identical metric. [#138786][#138786]
  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.running`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.currently_running`.
  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.successes`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.resume_completed`.
  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.retry_errors`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.resume_retry_error`.
  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.permanent_errors`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.resume_failed`.

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-general-changes">General changes</h3>

- When changefeeds are created with a resolved option lower than the `min_checkpoint_frequency` option, a notice is now printed, since this may lead to unexpected behavior. [#138181][#138181]

> - CockroachDB binaries are built with profile-guided optimization (PGO) enabled. [#138700][#138700]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CockroachDB binaries are now built with profile-guided optimization (PGO) enabled. [#138700][#138700]
```

## v25.1.0-alpha.3

Release Date: January 15, 2025

{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-backward-incompatible-changes">Backward-incompatible changes</h3>

> - Several metrics are redundant and have been removed. Below is a list mapping from each removed metric to an existing, identical metric. [#138786][#138786]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Several metrics are redundant and have been removed. The following list maps each removed metric to an existing, identical metric. [#138786][#138786]
```

  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.running`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.currently_running`.
  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.successes`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.resume_completed`.
  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.retry_errors`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.resume_retry_error`.
  - Removed `sql.schema_changer.permanent_errors`, which is redundant with `jobs.schema_change.resume_failed`.

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-general-changes">General changes</h3>

> - When changefeeds are created with a resolved option lower than the `min_checkpoint_frequency` option, a notice is printed to inform the user since this may lead to unexpected behavior. [#138181][#138181]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When changefeeds are created with a resolved option lower than the `min_checkpoint_frequency` option, a notice is now printed, since this may lead to unexpected behavior. [#138181][#138181]
```

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - Users can always see and control (pause/resume/cancel) jobs which they own. [#138178][#138178]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users can now always see and control (pause/resume/cancel) jobs that they own. [#138178][#138178]
```

> - Provide different options for `CREATE LOGICALLY REPLICATED TABLE`. [#138244][#138244]

Reviewer: This one needs some clarification.

Author: pinged the engineer and landed on

```
- Provide different options for `CREATE LOGICALLY REPLICATED TABLE`: `UNIDIRECTIONAL` and `BIDIRECTIONAL ON`. These options are used for `CREATE LOGICALLY REPLICATED TABLE`, but not `CREATE LOGICAL REPLICATION STREAM`. [#138244][#138244]
```

- `CHANGEFEED`s using named external connections now automatically update their configuration when the connection configuration changes. [#138237][#138237]
- Added support for `DO` statements embedded within PL/pgSQL routines and other `DO` statements. `DO` statements execute a block of code inline as an anonymous function. Currently, only a PL/pgSQL body is allowed. [#138709][#138709]
- Added support for `DO` statements in SQL, which allow a PL/pgSQL code block to be executed inline. [#138709][#138709]

> - `DO` statements can now be used as body statements in a SQL routine to execute PL/pgSQL code inline. [#138709][#138709]

Reviewer: This one seems redundant with the one directly above it.

Author: removed it!

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - If a row level TTL job is scheduled to run and the previous scheduled job for that table is still running, the scheduled run will now be skipped rather than waiting for the previous job to complete. [#138336][#138336]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a row-level TTL job is scheduled to run and the previous scheduled job for that table is still running, the scheduled run will now be skipped rather than waiting for the previous job to complete. [#138336][#138336]
```

> - Schema object identifiers (e.g. database names, schema names, table names, and function names) are no longer redacted when logging statements in the `EXEC` or `SQL_SCHEMA` channels. If redaction of these names is required, then the new cluster setting `sql.log.redact_names.enabled` can be set to `true`. The default value of the setting is `false`. [#136897][#136897]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Schema object identifiers (e.g., database names, schema names, table names, and function names) are no longer redacted when logging statements in the `EXEC` or `SQL_SCHEMA` channels. If redaction of these names is required, then the new cluster setting `sql.log.redact_names.enabled` can be set to `true`. The default value of the setting is `false`. [#136897][#136897]
```

- Object identifiers such as table names, schema names, function names, and type names are no longer redacted in the `SQL_SCHEMA` log channel. [#136897][#136897]

> - The default value of the cluster setting `admission.l0_file_count_overload_threshold` is changed to `4000`. [#138699][#138699]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Changed the default value of the cluster setting `admission.l0_file_count_overload_threshold` to `4000`. [#138699][#138699]
```

> - Introduced a metric, `sql.schema_changer.object_count`, that keeps track of the count of schema objects in the cluster. [#138786][#138786]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduced a metric, `sql.schema_changer.object_count`, that counts the number of schema objects in the cluster. [#138786][#138786]
```

> - Renamed the `changefeed.min_highwater_advance` cluster setting to `changefeed.resolved_timestamp.min_update_interval` to more accurately reflect its function. Its description in the automatically generated documentation has also been updated. The previous name remains usable for backwards compatibility. [#138673][#138673]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Renamed the `changefeed.min_highwater_advance` cluster setting to `changefeed.resolved_timestamp.min_update_interval` to more accurately reflect its function. Its description in the automatically generated documentation has also been updated. The previous name remains usable for backward compatibility. [#138673][#138673]
```

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- Added a `/debug/pprof/fgprof` endpoint to capture off-CPU stack traces. Use of this endpoint will have a noticeable impact on performance while the endpoint is being triggered. [#138779][#138779]

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

> - In the v2 **Databases > Table** page, the `CREATE` statement will now show up as expected for tables with custom schema names. [#138294][#138294]

Reviewer: Does the `>` render correctly? Might have to use the character string here.

```suggestion
- In the v2 **Databases > Table** page, the `CREATE` statement will now show up as expected for tables with custom schema names. [#138294][#138294]
```

Author: i have updated this to use `&gt;`

- Fixed issues with the virtual index scan on `crdb_internal.create_type_statements`, ensuring consistent results when querying user-defined types (UDTs) across databases. [#138295][#138295]
- Queries that perform a cast from the string representation of an array containing geometry or geography types to a SQL array type will now succeed. [#138557][#138557]

> - Secondary tenants will not fatal when issuing HTTP requests during tenant startup. [#138343][#138343]

Reviewer: Are we now discussing tenants in release notes, or no? If we are, the phrase "will not fatal" feels a bit colloquial IMO.

Author: > Are we now discussing tenants in release notes, or no? 

ah good point, per [the wiki](https://cockroachlabs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/ED/pages/1134166401/Publish+Release+Notes#Release-note-types-to-remove) we are not

also i've reviewed the actual commit and the issue and it fixes and it appears very, very internal and not user-facing 

therefore i've removed this line

> - A bug has been fixed that disregarded tuple labels in some cases. This could cause unexpected behavior, such as when converting a tuple to JSON with `to_jsonb`. See [#136167][#136167] for more details. This incorrect removal of tuple labels bug was introduced in v22.1.0, and changes in v24.3.0 made unexpected behavior due to the bug more likely. [#138791][#138791]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that disregarded tuple labels in some cases. This could cause unexpected behavior, such as when converting a tuple to JSON with `to_jsonb`. See [#136167][#136167] for more details. This incorrect removal of tuple labels bug was introduced in v22.1.0, and changes in v24.3.0 made unexpected behavior due to the bug more likely. [#138791][#138791]
```

- Fixed a bug where locks were taken on the system tables `system.users` and `system.role_options` even when `allow_role_memberships_to_change_during_transaction` was set. Now, users are able to create and drop users quickly when `allow_role_memberships_to_change_during_transaction` is set, even if there are contending transactions on `system.users` and `system.role_options`. [#137940][#137940]

<h3 id="v25-1-0-alpha-3-miscellaneous">Miscellaneous</h3>

> - Build CockroachDB binaries with profile-guided optimization (PGO) enabled. [#138700][#138700]

Reviewer: Do we need this? Usually I remove the whole Miscellaneous section.

Author: Debatable, but it is customer-facing IMO since it affects the binaries we build for release and will enable the term "profile guided optimization" to turn up in search results and hopefully save someone in Support from answering that question. 

However I've deleted the 'Misc' section and moved the note to the 'General' section since there was only one item there also.
